Muscle movement can be broken down into
concentric and eccentric motion.
Concentric muscle contraction is what usually
comes to mind when thinking of typical exercise.
It is the standard contraction and lifting motion,
when the muscle shortens and
its two connection points come close together.
This movement is acting against
the force of gravity and improves
the muscle's ability to pull and lift.
Eccentric contraction is utilizing the same muscle,
however activates during
the lowering part of the motion.
As the muscle lengthens,
the two connection points of the muscle
get further apart,
but the muscle continues to contract
and still exerts force on the weight.
It acts as a sort of braking mechanism,
slowing down the lowering movement
and preventing the weight from pulling down
too quickly with the force of gravity.
Eccentric training is crucial
as many of our daily routines
and habits depend on it.
Rudimentary activities such as sitting down
or walking down the stairs
involve such movements.
But rarely do we need just one
of these types of movements,
a combination of eccentric and concentric exercises
is essential in any healthy training program.